Copyright 2024 Chase Taylor
Permission is granted to copy,
distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation; with the Invariant
Sections being just "Why chTRACKER,"
with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license
is included in the file:
COPYING.DOCUMENTATION

---------CHTRACKER HELP SCREEN---------
Use up and down arrow keys to scroll.

This is where you'll go for information
on how to use chTRACKER. You're
likely viewing this in the program's
built-in help menu. If not, hi!

---# General

Press function keys F1 - F7 to change
menus. Here are basic descriptions:

F1: Help menu - Where you are right now

F2: Order menu - This is where you'd
    set what patterns to use on what
    instrument and where.

F3: Pattern menu - The real editor!
    This is where you edit notes,
    volumes, and effects.

F4: Instrument menu - Where you add
    instruments; LFSRs and other
    synths!

F5: Order management menu - This is
    where you delete and clone orders.

F6: Options menu - Currently where you
    set RPM and how many rows are in a
    single pattern.

F7: File menu - A built in file picker
    for the program. It should start in
    your home directory/folder. I'm
    still not quite sure how this acts
    with Windows, but it should work
    fine.

This program assumes you have basic
knowledge on how to use a chiptune
tracker. If not, there are many helpful
guides online. It's also a really good
idea to know hexadecimal. This program
has a lot of hexadecimal.

Most of the menus have information on
what key to press. Press ESC outside of
the file menu to quit the program. This
currently doesn't check for unsaved
changes (however that is planned), so
watch out!

In any menu (Except this one!), there
is a cursor (represented by the
foreground and background being
swapped) and you can move it using the
arrow keys.

---# Effects
This program has various effects (The
Eeeee collum in the pattern menu) and
every effect channel is completely
independent from each other. You can
start a pitch down effect on one column
and another pitch down effect on a
different collumn, and the effect will
be doubled. Effect list:

 -xxxx: Null. Does nothing.
 0abcS: Arpeggio. Switches between the
        base note and the note plus
        a semitones, the note plus b
        semitones, etc. at S speed.
        S=0 is fastest, and S=F is
        slowest. Relative to tempo.

 1xxxx: Pitch up. constantly increases
        pitch by x amount.

 2xxxx: Pitch down. constantly
        decreases pitch by x amount.

 5xxxx: Volume up. see 1xxxx.

 6xxxx: Volume down. see 2xxxx.

 Cxxxx: Instrument variation. Changes
        how an instrument sounds, e.g.
        the duty cycle on a square
        instrument.

---# Menus

I'm going to fully explain the menus
here, in order of how you would maybe
use them:

F7 - File menu:
    If you want to continue work from
    another time, or save work for
    another time, you go here. It
    starts in your home directory or
    folder and it's the only menu where
    the [ESC] key won't quit the
    program. Press [Return] on blue
    text (which are folders or
    directories) to view the files in
    there. Press [Return] on green text
    (files) to load the file. You will
    get the "Refused to open the file"
    error if:
     - The file is not a chTRACKER file
     - The file was saved with a
       different version
     - The file couldn't be opened at
       all (this might actually cause
       a more confusing error where
       nothing seems to happen)

    Press [S] in this menu to save a
    file. The program will ask for a
    filename. The filename extension
    is .cht (Though a bug makes it so
    it looks like .chts or similar).
    Simply type your filename in ([ESC]
    here will put you back in the file
    open menu instead of closing) and
    press enter to save the file. You
    might get "Refused to save the
    file"; This indicates a
    permissions issue or some other
    issue where your OS won't let the
    program save.

    Press [R] in this menu to render to
    a file. The program can render to
    .wav files! If you need another
    format, you'll need to convert the
    .wav to that format.

    Pressing ESC in this menu will move
    you up a directory/folder if
    possible. This can also be done by
    choosing the yellow ".."

F4 - Instrument menu:
    This is where you add, remove, and
    change instruments. [Z] will create
    a new instrument on the bottom,
    [X] will delete the selected
    instrument, and [C] will change the
    sound the instrument makes.

    Instruments start out as "Silent",
    which basically mutes them.
    Availible instrument types are:
     - 8 bit LFSR (car engine)
     - 14 bit LFSR (tv static)
     - Square
     - Triangle
     - Sawtooth
    PCM and wavetable will be coming 
    in a future update.

F3 - Pattern menu:
    This is where your song is actually
    made! Assuming you have 2
    instruments, You'll see something
    like this:

    00 Silent         01 Silent
00 |.. .. -0000 -0000|.. .. -0000 -0000|
01 |.. .. -0000 -0000|.. .. -0000 -0000|
   | And so on...    | And so on...    |

    It will be colored and will look
    somewhat different, but it should
    get the idea across. The agenda is:

TT |NO VV Eeeee Eeeee|NO VV Eeeee Eeeee|

    TT - The row number. Nothing else.

    N- Note. Goes from A (A) to L (G#).
       Each letter is 1 semitone- No
       sharps or flats!

    O- Octave. Goes from 0 to 9. The
       octave origin is at A instead of
       C (D in the tracker.)

    VV- SUPERFINE volume control! You
        get 256 (64) steps of volume!
        If you come from Furnace or
        FamiTracker and/or think this
        is excessive, you can get a
        simpler 16 step control using
        either just the last digit
        (eg F0 B0 60) or by making both
        digits the same (eg FF BB 66),
        which is more accurate. The
        program's mixer is very simple
        without any actual volume
        control, and can handle 4
        instruments at full (FF)
        volume. Any more and you get
        distortion. Technically 04 is
        the quietest volume because
        anything lower turns into 0 in
        the mixing process. Lower
        volumes are technically
        synthesized though. Just not
        mixed.

    Eeeee- Effects! See "---# Effects"
           above for an effect list.

    This is the only menu that doesn't
    display hotkeys, so i have to list
    them here:
     - [V] increases the view mode
     - [U] decreases the view mode
     - Letters A-L will change the
       note while an N collumn is
       selected
     - Numbers 0-9 will change octave
       while an O collumn is selected
     - Hexadecimal numbers can change
       E and eeee collumns
     - [N] goes to the next order in
       the song
     - [P] goes to the previous order
     - [-] on N or O collums clears the
       note. on E collums clears the
       effect.

    If you edit an E collum with an
    invalid effect nothing will happen.
    Otherwise the symbol in E will
    change. eeee is the value the
    effect uses.

    The view mode decides how much you
    see. They go like this:
    0: NO
    1: NO VV
    2: NO VV Eeee
    3: NO VV Eeee Eeee
    4: NO VV Eeee Eeee Eeee
    5: NO VV Eeee Eeee Eeee Eeee

    Each effects collumn is completely
    independent!

F2 - Order menu
    When it comes to music creation,
    the pattern menu is for creating
    small parts of a song, and this
    menu is made for putting those
    together!
    [Z] - Add a new order row
    [X] - Remove thr rou you're on
    [W] - Increment the selected pattern
    [S] - W but with decrement
    An order row holds as many collums
    as there are instruments.
    Instrument 0 has collumn 0, for
    example.
    Each square (00 inisially)
    represents what pattern the
    instrument should play at that time.
    When the end of the pattern is
    reached, a new order is played.
    You can select what order row to
    edit in the patten menu with the
    [N] and [P] keys.

F6 - Options menu
    This is where you choose your tempo
    and pattern length.
    There are two settings right now:

     - Rows per minute (RPM) (Tempo)
     - Rows per order (Pattern length)

    [W] increases the selected value.
    [S] decreases the selected value.
    [Shift+W] and [Shift+S will]
    increase or decrease by 10 if RPM
    is selected.

F5 - Order management menu
    This is where your verious pattern
    related tasks are done. [X] will
    delete a pattern and [C] will copy
    a pattern. (Right now copying
    doesn't seem to always work
    correctly)

---# Why chTRACKER?

People may be wondering what leg up
this chiptune tracker has from others.
The initial idea for making this
program came from two things:

1. I wanted to make a chiptune tracker
2. I wanted to learn more C++

However I soon found out I also wanted
to make a chiptune tracker that is free
from the idea of emulating specific
sound chips. So many ciptune trackers
want to emulate specific sound chips.
Whether it's just a 2A03, or there are
hundreds of chips, they can't be as
flexible as if you just put together a
ton of channels. I know modtrackers do
this, but they force PCM on you. You
have to use samples. You can't combine
various square waves, LFSRs and then
maybe PCM to create your own fantasy
chip. At least, not as easily. I want
this to be a place where you can plan
your own chips or just experiment
with what you can do just combining
random things together.
